---
layout: post
title: "HoroscopeFS: A virtual filesystem in Python for horoscope aggregation"
---

This is an experiment in writing a virtual filesystem in Python using
[fusepy](https://github.com/fusepy/fusepy).

The entire code is available on
[my github page](https://github.com/varunbpatil/HoroscopeFS).

<br/><br/>

#### What does this application do ?

Aggregates daily, weekly and monthly horoscopes based on your sunsign and/or
moonsign from various horoscope websites and makes them accessible under a
single directory in a predictable tree like directory structure.

Let's get started.

<br/><br/>

#### How to run it ?

```bash
$ mkdir -p /tmp/mnt; python horoscopeFS.py /tmp/mnt/ <sunsign> <moonsign>

# Run the commands below from another terminal

$ cd /tmp/mnt

$ tree /tmp/mnt
/tmp/mnt
|-- Astrosage
|   |-- daily
|   |-- monthly
|   `-- weekly
|-- Astroyogi
|   |-- daily
|   |-- monthly
|   `-- weekly
|-- AstroyogiCareer
|   |-- daily
|   |-- monthly
|   `-- weekly
`-- IndianAstrology2000
    |-- daily
    |-- monthly
    `-- weekly
```

You can see how the application provides a clean and consistent tree like
directory structure for horoscopes aggregated from different websites. You
can navigate directories and read files just like you would any other
directory or file.

<br/><br/>

#### The usual imports

```python
import os
import sys
import bs4
import fuse
import tempfile
import requests
import textwrap
import argparse
```

* bs4 - [Beautiful Soup](https://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup/?) for parsing HTML.

* fuse - [fusepy](https://github.com/fusepy/fusepy) to create a virtual filesystem using [FUSE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filesystem_in_Userspace).

* [tempfile](https://docs.python.org/3/library/tempfile.html) - To create temporary files and directories.

* [requests](http://docs.python-requests.org/en/master/) - To fetch HTML contents from a website.

* [textwrap](https://docs.python.org/3.1/library/textwrap.html) - To format text for display.

* [argparse](https://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html) - To parse command line arguments.


<br/><br/>

#### The starting point

Let's start by parsing the command line arguments and instantiating an object
that provides the filesystem functionality.

The user needs to provide a mount point for the filesystem and his/her sunsign
and moonsign.


```python
def main(mountpoint, sunsign, moonsign):
    fuse.FUSE(HoroscopeFS(sunsign, moonsign),
              mountpoint,
              nothreads=True,
              foreground=True)


if __name__ == '__main__':
    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
    parser.add_argument("mountpoint", help="Mount point for the Virtual File System")
    parser.add_argument("sunsign", help="Your sun sign")
    parser.add_argument("moonsign", help="Your moon sign")
    args = parser.parse_args()

    main(args.mountpoint, args.sunsign.lower(), args.moonsign.lower())
```

<br/><br/>

#### The filesystem implementation

The following is the main class that implements the filesystem functionality.
Without this, you won't be able to navigate the filesystem and read data.
This might seem like a hard thing to implement, but, as you'll see as you
read further, it is actually pretty simple for the application we're writing.

Note that <b>I've removed a lot of the original code
(which you can follow along from
[my github page](https://github.com/varunbpatil/HoroscopeFS/blob/master/horoscopeFS.py))
in order to concentrate on things that are relevant at this stage</b>.

```python
class HoroscopeFS(fuse.Operations):
    """Virtual filesystem for aggregating horoscopes from various websites"""

    def __init__(self, sunsign, moonsign):
	pass

    def getattr(self, path, fh=None):
	pass

    def readdir(self, path, fh):
	pass

    def read(self, path, length, offset, fh):
	pass
```

Now, let's take a moment to think about what filesystem functionality our
application will need to provide to its users.

Firstly, we'll need to provide filesystem navigation to <b>navigate the tree like
directory structure</b> that our application will make visible to its users.

Secondly, we'll need to provide our filesystem with the ability to <b>list the
contents of a directory</b>, i.e, files in a directory.

Lastly, we'll need to be able to <b>read the contents of files</b>.

You'd be surprised, but the last three class methods above -
`getattr(), readdir() and read()` - are the only ones you'll need to
implement to provide these filesystem functionalities.

`getattr()` as you might have guessed is used to get directory/file attributes
like permissions, size, etc.

`readdir()` is used to list the contents of a directory, i.e, list the files
inside a directory.

`read()` is used to read the contents of a file.

Now, lets walk through how you might actually implement these.
<br/><br/><br/>

```python
def __init__(self, sunsign, moonsign):
    # Get default stats for an empty directory and empty file.
    # The temporary directory and file are automatically deleted.
    with tempfile.TemporaryDirectory() as tmp_dir:
	self.stat_dict_dir = \
		self._convert_stat_to_dict(os.lstat(tmp_dir))

    with tempfile.NamedTemporaryFile() as tmp_file:
	self.stat_dict_file = \
		self._convert_stat_to_dict(os.lstat(tmp_file.name))

    self.sunsign = sunsign
    self.moonsign = moonsign
    self.dot_dirs = ['.', '..']
    self.current_module = sys.modules[__name__]
    self.horoscope_objs = {}
```

The `tempfile` module is used to create a temporary directory and a temporary
file in order to get their stats which can then be replicated for all the
other directories and files in our virtual filesystem with modifications wherever
required.

`self.dot_dirs` stores the default current and parent directories that
all directories have so that it can be used when a directories contents
are listed later on.

`self.horoscope_objs` contains one object per horoscope website that we're
aggregating from. It is currently empty and will be <b>instantiated on-demand</b>,
which is to say an object will be created for a particular website when the user
navigates into the top level directory corresponding to that website.

<br/><br/><br/>

```python
def getattr(self, path, fh=None):
    if any(map(path.endswith, horoscope_sites)):
	# For directories corresponding to the horoscope websites,
	# return the default stats for directory.
	return self.stat_dict_dir
    elif any(map(path.endswith, horoscope_types)):
	# Fetch content from the horoscope site we are looking at on-demand.
	self._construct_obj_from_path(path)

	# For files corresponding to the horoscope types,
	# return the stats for the file with st_size set appropriately.
	stat = dict(self.stat_dict_file) # Create a copy before modifying
	stat['st_size'] = self._get_file_size_from_path(path)
	return stat
    else:
	# For all other files/directories, return the stats from the OS.
	return self._convert_stat_to_dict(os.lstat(path))
```

The `getattr()` method is responsible for returning a dictionary of
directory/file attributes.

We know that any directory in our virtual filesystem ends with the name
of the horoscope website. We use this information to return the attributes
of the temporary directory which we had created during `__init__()` without
any modifications whatsoever.

For files, we need to do a bit more work. The attributes of a file depend
on its contents (size of the file, for example). So, we will first need to
fetch the contents (horoscope) of the file from the horoscope website before
we can decide what the file's attributes should be. This is exactly what the
`_construct_obj_from_path()` method does. Given the full path to the file,
it infers the horoscope website from the path and instantiates an object of
the class corresponding to that horoscope website on-demand. The act of
instantiating an object fetches the horoscope from the horoscope website and
stores it for future use (we'll see how to fetch the contents from the website
later in this post). Note that an object is instantiated only if an
object for that horoscope website doesn't already exist. Once the contents are
fetched and stored locally, we can calculate the file size depending on the
size of the fetched contents. This is exactly what `_get_file_size_from_path()`
does. We then override only the size of the temporary file we created during
`__init__()` and return the file's attributes.

<br/><br/><br/>

```python
def readdir(self, path, fh):
    if any(map(path.endswith, horoscope_sites)):
	# Each horoscope website directory contains one file for each
	# horoscope type.
	return self.dot_dirs + horoscope_types
    else:
	# Top level directory (mountpoint) contains one directory for each
	# horoscope website.
	return self.dot_dirs + horoscope_sites
```

The `readdir()` method is used to list the contents of a directory.

If the directory's name ends with the horoscope website, then we already know
what files it should contain - The files corresponding to the "daily", "weekly"
and monthly horoscopes.

If the directory's name is something else (in our case, it can only be the
mount point because there are no other directories in our application), then,
we return the names of the directories corresponding to the horoscope websites.

Ofcourse, we have to always return the two special directories ('.' and '..')
corresponding to the current and parent directories.

<br/><br/><br/>

```python
def read(self, path, length, offset, fh):
    return self._read_data_from_path(path, length, offset)
```

`read()` is used to read the contents of a file (the actual horoscope).
The `_read_data_from_path()` method simply return the contents that were fetched
from the horoscope website when an object was instantiated for that website
in `_construct_obj_from_path()`.


<br/><br/><br/>

That wasn't too difficult !!!. Now all that remains to be seen is how to fetch
the horoscope from the horoscope website.

<br/><br/>

#### The business logic

Lets walk through fetching contents from one horoscope website. All others
should work similarly.

Like I mentioned previously, each horoscope website is a class on its own.
Contents are fetched from the website when an object of this class is
instantiated. As long as the application is running, only one object of each
class can be instantiated. Objects are instantiated on-demand i.e, when the
user actually tries to list or read the contents of the directory corresponding
to the horoscope website.

The name of the directory corresponding to the horoscope website is same as
the name of the class corresponding to that horoscope website.

```python
class Req(object):
    """Get HTML page using requests and parse it using BeautifulSoup"""

    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__()


    def _get(self, url, timeout=30):
        try:
            response = requests.get(url, timeout=timeout)
            response.raise_for_status()
            return bs4.BeautifulSoup(response.text, "html.parser")
        except:
            return None


class Astrosage(Req):
    """Horoscopes from www.astrosage.com"""

    def __init__(self, sunsign, moonsign):
        super().__init__()

        base_url = "http://www.astrosage.com/horoscope/"
        self.horoscope = {}
        for horoscope_type in horoscope_types:
            url = "{}/{}-{}-horoscope.asp"
            url = url.format(base_url, horoscope_type, moonsign)
            self.horoscope[horoscope_type] = self._parse_html(url, horoscope_type)


    def _parse_html(self, url, horoscope_type):
        soup = self._get(url)
        if soup:
            if horoscope_type == "daily":
                html_class_attr = "ui-large-content-box"
            else:
                html_class_attr = "ui-sign-content-box"
            content = soup.find(class_=html_class_attr).text
            content = textwrap.fill(content.strip()) + "\n"
            return content.encode()
        else:
            return NA
```

`__init__()` is called when we want to instantiate an object for a horoscope website.
This is when we have to fetch the contents (horoscope) from the horoscope website
and parse the HTML returned. This is exactly what the `_get()` method inherited
from the `Req` class does. It uses the `requests` module to get HTML from the
horoscope website and then runs `Beautiful Soup` to parse the returned HTML.
Finally, in `_parse_html()`, we search for the specific HTML tag that contains the
horoscope contents we're looking for and extract only that bit which is then
passed through the `textwrap` module's `fill()` method to restrict the output
to 80 columns so that it is easier to read on the terminal. This is the content
that the `read()` method of the `HoroscopeFS` class will eventually get and cause
it to be displayed to the user.


<br/><br/><br/>

That's it !!!. We've now written a simple virtual filesystem in Python using FUSE.
There are a lot of other filesystem functionalities that we didn't need to use/override
for our application, but, if you are ever in need of any of them for your own
application, I'd recommend looking at the
[fusepy examples section](https://github.com/fusepy/fusepy/tree/master/examples).
